Lost Ruins of Arnak – Expedition Leaders Solitaire Campaign Challenge 
Who is the greatest expedition leader to fathom the Lost Ruins of Arnak?  Who among these talented individuals can 
aspire to the coveted title of “Ara-Anu’s Chosen One”?  It is time to test which archaeologist reigns supreme! 
Overview: In this solitaire campaign challenge, you will be pitting each expedition leader, individually, against The Rival, 
down the challenge of all four Research Tracks, while escalating the difficulty until success is achieved, death claims the 
weak, and a final score for Dominance is determined for each Leader played. 
Starting Difficulty : The Rival’s Action Card Deck starts using all 5 Red Action Cards 
The Adventures: 
1. Bird Temple 
2. Snake Temple 
3. Monkey Temple / Snake Board 
4. Lizard Temple / Snake Board 
Escalating Difficulty Rules:  
After each SUCCESSFUL Adventure, the Expedition Leader progresses to the next Adventure, and increases the Difficulty 
Level by one – adding in a random Purple Action Card , and removing the corresponding Red Action Card. 
After each FAILED or TIED Adventure, the Adventure must be repeated at the same Difficulty Level, however a 
DIFFERENT Action Card Deck is constructed for The Rival. For any Adventure after the first basic Level 5 difficulty Bird 
Temple Adventure, refresh any Purple Cards included under the current difficulty, replacing them with a new random 
selection of Purple Card Action Cards.  This will keep each challenge fresh, avoiding Expedition Leaders repeatedly 
coming up against Rival Deck combinations that seem uniquely tuned to giving them a problem.  
Note: Play-testing revealed that you should NOT include BOTH Purple Action Cards which give the Rival BOTH Artifacts 
AND Items. This deadly combination unbalanced Campaign Difficulty too wildly between Expedition Leaders. 
Dominance / Death: Pioneered by The Search for Professor Kutil Campaign , the Dominance Score  is simply the 
cumulative delta (or difference) between scores for successive Adventures – but there is a catch: For each FAILED 
Adventure, a -5pt Penalty  is applied to the Expedition Leader’s overall Dominance AFTER repeating an Adventure. 
Should the Expedition Leader ever incur a NEGATIVE Overall Dominance, they are KILLED!  
Example 1: For the ideal example, consider a contender who defeats the Bird Temple at difficulty 5, then proceeds to 
the Snake Temple on difficulty 6, and so on.  Each victory over The Rival would sum the differences between their four 
scores for that Expedition Leader’s Final Dominance. 
Example 2: Less than ideal (but more realistic perhaps) sees a contender pass the Bird Temple at difficulty 5, then fail 
the Snake Temple on difficulty 6.  Say their Dominance after the Bird Temple was +17 – which was how much they 
defeated The Rival by. For the Snake Temple, they lost by -12… so their Overall Dominance has now been cut to +5.  
After swapping in a new random selection of Purple Action Cards for The Rival Deck, they attempt the Snake Temple 
again, and win by +7!  Their new Dominance Score goes up to 12, but they must incur the -5pt Penalty  for having to 
repeat the Adventure, so their overall Dominance diminishes to 7.  Should they fail the next Adventure by more than 2, 
the 5pt Penalty would kill them off entirely – so they’d better make it good! 
Supremacy: After playing however many Expedition Leaders you choose, the coveted title of “Ara-Anu’s Chosen 
One” goes to the highest Overall Dominance! 
Conclusion: I had great fun play-testing this scheme.. it lends much to the solitaire replay value of the game, beyond just 
playing random Expedition Leaders against The Rival in one-off scenarios.  It’s interesting especially to see which Leader 
plays best to your own particular style, and rotating the Rival deck kept every Adventure fresh and interesting.. Enjoy! 