Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode
Release 1.0
Richard T. Saunders
Jul 12, 2021CONTENTS
1 Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode 3
1.1 Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3 Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.4 Game Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.5 Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
iiiLost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode, Release 1.0
Contents:
CONTENTS 1Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode, Release 1.0
2 CONTENTSCHAPTER
ONE
LOST RUINS OF ARNAK: COOPERATIVE MODE
1.1 Preface
This is a set of rules I designed to make Lost Ruins of Arnak cooperative.
There are only 18 cards total needed (and included here):
1. 4 Player Character cards
2. 14 Shadow Creature Motivation cards
The win condition changes depending on the two Shadow Creature Motivation cards drawn: the players must cooper-
atively satisfy the conditions of BOTH motivation cards to win.
1.2 Introduction
Some strange, shadowy creatures have been spotted in major metropolitan areas across the globe! These strange
creatures, dubbed “The Shadow Creatures” have been dealing chaos, havoc, and damage everywhere they appear!
What do the Shadow Creatures want? What are their motivations?
With the world in chaos, major governments have shared all their intel on the Shadow Creatures. Synthesizing this
collective intel, the world’s top researchers have gleaned that the Shadow Creatures have some connection to the Lost
Ruins of Arnak. But what is that connection?
The answer lies nears the site of the Lost Ruins of Arnak! The researchers must travel there to ﬁnd the answer! Using
research, exploration, smarts, and a little luck, the researchers will work together to discover the Shadow Creatures
motivations and the appropriate response!
Can the researchers ﬁgure out the Shadow Creatures motivations before time runs out and the Earth is destroyed? Can
YOU help them?
To win the game, players must together discover and satisfy the Shadow Creature Motivations to save the Earth!
1.3 Set-up
1.3.1 Character Set-Up
At the beginning of the game, each player (randomly or deliberately) gets a Character card. Each Character has a
special ability he/she can use once per round. Character cards are like assistants: exhaust and refresh Character cards
just like assistants. At the start of the game, all Character cards start refreshed (they will exhausted when used and
refreshed at the start of each round).
3Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode, Release 1.0
1.3.2 Board Set-up
Randomly draw, but do not look at, two Shadow Creature Motivation cards. Place one Motivation card (face down) on
the round 4 space and one Motivation card (face down) on the round 5 space (where the Moonstaff would go to denote
rounds 4 and 5).
At the start of round 4, you will reveal the ﬁrst Motivation card and at the start of round 5, you will reveal the second
Motivation card.
These Shadow Creature Motivation cards represent the “win” conditions for the game! To win, BOTH Shadow Crea-
ture Motivation cards must be satisﬁed to win the game!! Take a look at a few of the cards you DIDN’T use to get a
sense of what these cards are.
The cooperative game game (usually) has no use for Victory Points: it’s all about collectively discovering and satisfy-
ing the Shadow Creature Motivations.
1.4 Game Flow
Overall, the cooperative rules don’t change the game much; the cooperative mode changes the win conditions and adds
a few rules. Note that Victory Points no longer matter (in general).
In the beginning, the cooperative game of The Lost Ruins of Arnak plays very much like the base game, where
players explore, research, and gather resources fairly independently. Near the end of the game, players will need to be
collaborating closely to win.
1.4.1 Share Resources
Share Resources at The Start Of A Round
At the start of a round, players may share/trade ANY resources (gold, compasses, tablets, arrowheads, gems, Idols,
and Guardians) except for cards and workers.
Note that this sharing is ONLY at the start of a round (the day)! Thematically, the researchers get together at the
start of the day to share their research, but go out separately to explore and research!! They are no longer together to
share!!!
Hint! Be especially cognizant of this sharing at the start of round 5: that’s likely when you’ll need it the most!
“At the start of the day, the researchers get together and share what they’ve learned throughout the day”.
NOTE: You must share before you look at your cards at the start of the round.
1.4.2 Research Motivations
If players wait until the start of the 4th or 5th round to see the Shadow Creature Motivation cards, they may be unlikely
able to satisify the conditions on those cards. There is a mechanism to ﬂip the Motivations face-up early, but it is not
easy. You may add Research Tokens (either a gold or compass) to Motivation cards to ﬂip them up early: you can
“Research Motivations”!!!
If you add 1 Research Token Per Player to Motivation Card 1 (on space 4), you may ﬂip it as soon as you placed the
last token.
If you add 2 Research Tokens Per Player to Motivation Card 2 (on space 5), you may ﬂip it as soon as you placed the
last token.
“We must discover the motivations early!”
4 Chapter 1. Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative ModeLost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode, Release 1.0
How do Players Research Motivations?
On your turn, you may play a research token when you do any of the following on your turn:
1.Field Work : Anytime you “Discover a New Site”, you may discard a gold or compass (from your supply) to
place a research token
2.Double-Check Your Work : Whenever your Journal meets your Magnifying glass on the research track, you may
discard a gold or compass (from your supply) to place a research token.
3.Grad Student : You may tap your assistant (for free, no gold or compass) to place a research token: this is in place
of your assistant’s normal ability. An upgraded assistant allows you to put 2 research tokens on a motivation
card!
4.Peer Review : If your Magnifying Glasses ever meets a Magnifying glass of a different color on the research
track, you may discard a gold or compass (from your supply) to place a research token.
5.Dissection Research : You may destroy an Idol to put 2 research tokens on a Motivation card.
6.Hard Work : You may exile a card with Victory Points on it, and place that many Research Tokens on a Motivation
card.
For ease of play, you can use either compasses or gold tokens (or both) to represent Research Tokens. Note, there’s no
limit to the number of Research Tokens one player can place on a Motivation card to ﬂip it.
For example: In a 3-Player Game, players need to collectively place 6 Research Tokens on Motication Card 2 to ﬂip
it.
1.4.3 Extensions
For an easier game, move the Motivation cards up so they are revealed earlier: on rounds 3 and 4.
For a harder game, move the Motivation cards so they are revealed later: on rounds 5 and 6! Yes, there’s no round 6,
which means you would have to reveal it using Research to see it before the end of the game!
For a simpler game, ignore the Research Motivations rule and simpy reveal on rounds 3 and 4.
For a different solo game, use the cooperative rules with 1 character: the cooperative rules scale for 1 to 4 players.
(You can also play solo by playing two characters for a harder game).
1.4.4 Contact
This is the ﬁrst pass at some cooperative rules. If you have any comments or thoughts, please contact me at return-
fromsubroutine @ gmail.com
1.5 Cards
Included on the next 2 pages are the cards for the cooperative mode. Print them out on card stock and cut them out.
Note that they are just 1-sided! There should be 18 cards total: 4 character cards and 14 Motivation Cards.
1.5. Cards 5SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION
Rapacious :
The Shadow Creatures want to
mine Earth's Resources! To
prevent this, all explored
sites MUST have a Guardian on
them before Game End. As a
main action, players may
place a previously overcome
guardian on an explored
Location: they must pay the
original overcome cost to
place them.
"Defend the Ruins!"Warlike :
The Shadow Creatures want
war! To defend against them,
the researchers need to
befriend as many Guardians as
possible! Each player needs
3 used Guardians or 2 unused
Guardian (by Game End) each
to ward off the Shadow
Creatures.
"We must defend ourselves!"Scared Young :
The Shadow Creatures are just
younglings who are causing
havoc because they are scared
kids. As a group, the
players must have 1 Gem, 1
Arrowhead, 1 Tablet and2
Gold Coins (per player) to
keep the kids "entertained"
at Game End.
"Oh! Shiny!"
SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION
Fear Vampires :
The Shadow Creatures feed on
FEAR (cards)! All players
must exile all Fear cards
from all hands, decks, and
discards, by Game End in
order to win.
"Do not give into the Fear!"Explorers :
The Shadow Creatures are
explorers like ourselves.
They simply want to take back
items of cultural interest
back to their museums. All
players must discard 3 Items
FROM THEIR HAND on the last
round to satisify the Shadow
Creature interests.
"They are anthropologists!"Reclaimers :
The Shadow Creatures
"technology" (the artifacts)
have been scattered across
the stars! They simply want
to reclaim what is theirs!
All players must discard 3
Artifacts FROM THEIR HAND on
the last round to satiate the
Shadow Creatures.
"Give them back!"
SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION
Trapped :
The Shadow Creatures are
stranded inour dimension and
they just want to return
home. To open the
dimensional gate, each player
must discard 3 Gems at a
different discovered site on
the last round to open the
gate back.
"The Gems open the gates!"Confused :
The Shadow Creatures don't
understand the humans: they
can't conceive that their
actions are hurting us. The
researchers must explore the
Lost Temple andpay forone
of each Temple tile (11, 6,
and2)asRosetta stones for
communicating withthe Shadow
Creatures. Once the
researchers have these, they
can communicate withthe
Shadow Creatures to divert
tragedy.
"The temple tiles are key!"Xenophobic :
The Shadow Creatures want
nothing to do withus. They
ask us to cover all explored
sites so we will now deal
withthem. All sites must be
covered by Game End. Instead
of Digging at a site, use
your archeologist to cover
the site forthe cost of 1
compass and1 arrowhead: your
archeologist must still be
able pay the travel cost to
travel there before he can
cover it.
"We will stay out of their
way."Lost Ruins of Arnak: Cooperative Mode, Release 1.0
SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION
Librarians :
The Shadow Creatures are
scholars looking to collect
information fortheir
libraries. As a group, the
players need to have 4
tablets per player to give to
the Shadow Creatures to
satisfy their curiousity.
"They want books!"Advanced :
The Shadow Creatures will
only deal withadvanced
creatures. All basic cards
must be exiled from all
players hands, decks, and
discards orthe players lose.
Once this card isrevealed,
an Exile action will exile N
cards across all players
(where N isthe number of
players).
"We must be advanced!"Cultural Exchange :
The Shadow Creatures want to
take some of your people back
to the home world to learn
from. Each player must
sacrifice two upgraded (gold)
assistants and2 Guardians
each to attend the Shadow
Creatures homeworld.
"I mean, they are only grad
students..."
SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION SHADOW CREATURE MOTIVATION Character
Skybound :
The Shadow Creatures can only
commuinicate when airborne.
All players need to be able
to generate 3 airplanes worth
of travel on the last turn to
fly withthe Shadow Creatures
to gain their respect.
"We must fly!"Holy Symbol Reclamation :
The idols are Holy Symbols
andmust be given back to the
Shadow Creatures. Each
player must have 3 Idols
(unused) on the last round to
give to the Shadow Creatures
so they will go away.
"Return!"Allison “Inspire!” Ewing :
Allison isgood at inspiring
her assistants. Once per
round, Dr. Ewing may spend a
gold orcompass to refresh an
assistant.
"Inspire!"
Character Character Character
Charlie “Skyking” Cooper :
Charlie loves to fly and has
his own airplane! Once per
round, Charlie may generate a
free airplane (for travel or
other purposes).
"Skyking!"Andrew “Moneybags” Smith :
Andrew isindependently
wealthy. Once per round,
Andrew gets 1 free gold.
"I love GOOLLD!"Sam “Dealmaker” Kerns :
Sam is the king of deals!
Once per round, Sam may
either buy two items or
artifacts at a cost reduction
of 1 OR Sam may buy 1 item or
artifact at a cost reduction
of 2.
"Deal!"
1.5. Cards 7