Lost	Ruins	of	Arnak		Introduction:	Players	take	the	role	of	explorers,	investigating	the	island	of	Arnak.	They	will	equip	their	expedition,	search	the	jungles	for	artefacts,	idols	and	expedition	sites,	and	overcome	guardians,	aiming	to	learn	the	secrets	of	the	island.	Game	End	and	Goal:	The	game	ends	after	5	Rounds.	After	final	scoring,	the	player	with	most	VPs	wins.		Setup:	1. Place	the	Main	Board	in	the	middle	of	the	table.	Set	it	Bird	Temple	Side	up	(indicated	R	above	expedition	track).	a. For	an	advanced	game,	use	the	Snake	Temple	(see	Variants).	2. Take	the	Cards	(which	all	have	the	same	backs),	and	separate	them	as	follows	into:	a. 40	Item	Cards	(Trowel	icon)	–	shuffle	deck,	and	place	face-down	top	right	of	board.	b. 35	Artefact	Cards	(Vase	icon)	-	shuffle	deck,	and	place	face-down	top	left	of	board.		c. 19	Fear	Cards	–	place	as	a	face-up	deck,	middle	top	of	board.	d. Then,	place	the	Moon	Staff	between	the	first	and	second	artefact/item	card	slots.	e. Then,	deal	1	Artefact	face-up	to	the	slot	left	of	the	moon	staff,	and	5	Items,	one	to	each	slot,	face-up	to	the	right	of	the	Moon	Staff.	3. Take	the	16	Idol	Tiles	(hexagonal),	shuffle	them	face-down	and	place	them	on	the	sites	(middle	of	board)	as	follows:	a. 1	Idol	on	each	Level	1	(I)	Site	b. 2	Idols	on	each	Level	2	(II)	Site	c. Then	flip	all	Idols	on	the	board	face-up.	4. Depending	on	the	player	count,	you	may	need	to	add	up	to	5	Blocking	Tiles	to	the	game	board	as	follows:	a. In	a	4P	game,	the	blocking	tiles	are	not	used.	b. In	a	3P	game,	block	3	‘double-boots’	action	spaces	using	three	of	the	5	Blocking	Tiles		i. The	blocking	tiles	have	each	site’s	effect	printed	on	their	reverse	so	you	can	randomise	them	face-down	and	draw	3	to	determine	which	3	sites	to	block).		ii. All	the	sites	that	can	potentially	be	blocked	are	found	in	the	bottom	row	of	sites.	c. In	 a	 2P	 game,	 similarly,	 block	 all	 5	 ‘double	 boots’	 action	 spaces.	 Each	 site	 will	have	 space	 for	 only	 1	archaeologist.	5. Take	the	24	Temple	Tiles	(Gold,	Silver,	Bronze	oblongs),	sort	them	by	colour,	and	place	them	in	stacks	on	their	slots	above	the	Research	Track.	Each	Stack	should	contain	the	same	number	of	tiles	as	there	are	players,	with	the	remaining	Temple	Tiles	being	returned	to	the	box.	6. Take	the	18	Research	Bonus	Tiles	(square,	with	the	same	backs	as	the	Cards),	shuffle	them	face-down,	and	place	them	on	the	board	as	follows:	a. Lost	Temple	Bonus	Stack:	Make	a	stack	with	tiles	equal	to	the	number	of	players	face-down	at	the	top	of	the	research	track.		b. Bonus	Tile	Spaces:	Research	Token	spaces	on	the	Research	track	each	get	1	Bonus	Tile	(depending	on	the	number	of	players	–	check	each	space	for	the	player	count).	Once	the	spaces	requiring	Research	Tokens	have	been	populated	with	face-down	tokens,	flip	the	tokens	on	these	spaces	face-up.		7. The	Supply	Board	can	be	placed	anywhere	near	the	Game	Board.	Place	the	following	components	on	the	Supply	Board:	a. Resources	(separate	 supplies	 for	 the	16	Tablet	 Tokens,	12	 Arrowhead	 Tokens,	9	 Jewel	 Tokens,	27	Gold	Coins,	27	Compass	Tokens).	b. Level	1	(I)	Site	Tokens	–	Shuffle	the	10	Level	1	Sites,	and	place	them	face-down.	c. Guardian	Tiles	–	Shuffle	the	15	Guardian	Tiles,	and	place	them	face-down	d. Level	2	(II)	Site	Tokens	–	Shuffle	the	6	Level	2	Sites,	and	place	them	face-down.	e. Assistant	Tiles	–	Shuffle	the	12	Assistant	Tiles,	and	place	them	silver-side	up	into	3	random	stacks	of	4.		8. Each	player	chooses	a	colour	(R/Y/G/B),	and	takes	the	following	components	in	their	colour:	a. Player	Board	b. Research	Tokens	(a	 Magnifier,	 and	 a	 Notebook),	 which	 they	 place	below	 the	 research	 track,	 with	 the	magnifier	on	top	of	the	notebook.		c. 2	Archaeologist	Figures,	which	they	place	on	their	player	board	(on	the	tents).		d. 4	Basic	Cards	(2	Funding,	2	Compasses).	They	additionally	take	2	Fear	Cards	from	the	Fear	Deck.	Shuffle	these	6	starting	cards	together,	and	place	them	face-down	on	your	Player	Board	(LHS).		9. The	player	who	most	recently	visited	a	new	place	is	the	Starting	Player,	and	gets	the	Starting	Player	Marker	(alarm	clock).	The	player	order	proceeds	clockwise	from	the	Starting	Player.	10. Give	the	players	their	starting	resources	as	follows:	a. P1	=	2	Gold	b. P2	=	2	Gold,	1	Compass	c. P3	=	2	Gold,	1	Compass	d. P4	=	1	Gold,	2	Compasses				Course	of	Play:	The	game	is	played	in	5	Rounds	(I-V).	Each	Round	proceeds	as	follows:	1. Draw:	All	players	draw	from	their	decks	until	they	have	a	hand	of	5	Cards.		a. If	a	player	has	insufficient	Cards	in	the	deck	to	fill	their	hand,	they	draw	all	they	can.	2. Take	Turns:	Beginning	with	the	Starting	Player	and	proceeding	clockwise,	players	take	turns.	On	their	turn	they	do	1	Main	Action,	plus	any	number	of	Unlimited	Actions.	See	Main	Actions	(below)	3. Pass:	If	you	have	completed	all	actions	you	wish	to	perform	on	your	turn,	you	may	Pass.	Once	all	players	have	passed,	proceed	to	step	4.	4. Set	Up	for	Next	Round:		a. Shuffle	all	the	cards	in	your	play	area	(not	your	deck).	Return	them	to	the	bottom	of	your	deck.		b. Set	the	Game	Board	up	for	the	next	round.		c. Pass	the	Starting	Player	Marker	to	the	left.	5. Move	the	Moon	Staff:	Move	the	Moon	Staff	one	divider	to	the	right.		Main	Actions:	On	their	turn,	the	player	does	1	Main	Action,	plus	a	unlimited	Free	Actions.	The	Main	Actions	are:	1. Dig	at	a	Site:		2. Discover	a	New	Site	3. Overcome	a	Guardian	4. Buy	a	Card	5. Play	a	Card	6. Research	7. Pass		Playing	Cards:		• Each	Card	in	your	Hand	can	be	played	for	its	Travel	Value	(Boot/Car/Boat/Plane	icon,	top	left)),	OR	for	its	Effect	(main	panel),	but	NOT	BOTH.		o Fear	Cards	have	Travel	Value	(Boot),	but	no	Effect.		• When	you	play	a	card	from	your	hand,	place	it	in	your	Play	Area	(to	one	side	of	your	Player	Board).	• Any	Effect	with	the	Lightning	Symbol	is	a	Free	Action,	and	does	not	consume	your	Main	Action	to	do	(but	does	use	the	card,	so	you	cannot	also	use	its	Travel	Value	as	well	on	the	same	turn).		• You	may	perform	as	many	Free	Actions	as	you	wish	before,	after,	or	even	during	your	Main	Action.		1:	Dig	at	a	Site:	On	your	turn,	you	can	dig	at	any	of	the	5	Tent	sites,	and	potentially	at	any	available	(I)	or	(II)	site	after	they	have	been	discovered.	To	Dig	at	a	Site:	1. Pay	the	Travel	Cost	depicted	on	the	vacant	space	you	wish	to	move	to.		a. The	travel	cost	is	depicted	by	1	or	2	icons	showing	a	Plane,	Car,	Boat	or	Boot.	Play	a	card	with	the	relevant	icon(s)	to	your	play	area	to	pay	it.	Remember	the	travel	hierarchy:	i. A	Card	with	1	Plane	icon	can	pay	any	1	travel	icon	cost.	ii. A	card	with	1	Car	icon	can	pay	1	Car	or	1	Boot	icon	cost	iii. A	card	with	1	Boat	icon	can	pay	1	Boat	or	1	Boot	cost	iv. A	card	with	1	Boot	icon	can	pay	1	Boot	cost.	v. Two	Coins	can	pay	for	any	single	icon.	vi. Two	different	sources	can	be	used	to	pay	a	two-icon	cost.	vii. Any	excess	icons	you	play	cannot	be	carried	over	to	the	next	turn.	2. Move	your	archaeologist	to	that	space.	3. Resolve	the	Effect	of	the	icons	depicted	at	that	site.	Usually	you	will	gain	resources.	Also	see	Appendix	for	effects.			2:	Discover	a	New	Site:	At	the	start	of	the	game,	only	the	five	tent	sites	are	available.	During	the	game	you	will	discover	new	(I)	and	(II)	sites.	You	do	this	as	follows:	1. Traverse	the	Wilderness:	Pay	3	Compasses	to	discover	a	(I)	site,	or	6	Compasses	to	discover	a	(II)	site.	2. Take	the	Idol:	Collect	any	Idol(s)	at	that	location	and	resolve	their	effect.	If	the	location	has	2	Idols,	resolve	the	effect	of	the	face-up	one	only.	Then	place	any	idols	collected	face-down	on	the	supply	crates	(NOT	on	the	Idol	Slots	yet)	on	your	player	board.		a. Idol	Slot	Effects:	As	a	Free	Action	on	your	turn	(or	a	future	turn)	you	may	move	1	Idol	from	the	crates	to	an	Idol	Slot.	If	you	do,	gain	one	of	the	5	Idol	Slot	effects	(shown	left	of	slots).	However,	EMPTY	idol	slots	are	worth	Points	at	the	end	of	the	game,	so	use	your	Idol	Slot	Effects	sparingly/wisely.	Once	placed	in	an	Idol	Slot,	Idols	cannot	be	moved	or	removed,	unless	a	game	effect	specifically	permits	it.	b. Each	Idol	is	worth	3	Points	at	the	end	of	the	game	(irrespective	of	whether	its	in	a	slot	or	on	a	crate).		3. Discover	the	Site:	Take	the	top	tile	from	the	corresponding	site	stack	(I)	or	(II),	place	it	at	the	site	you	discovered	and	immediately	resolve	its	effect.		4. Awaken	the	Guardian:	Draw	the	top	tile	from	the	Guardian	Stack	and	place	it	face-up	on	the	site	tile.	The	Guardian	has	no	immediate	effect,	but	at	the	end	of	the	round,	if	the	Guardian	not	overcome	and	your	archaeologist	is	still	at	that	site,	you	will	take	1	Fear	card.	You	can	try	to	overcome	the	guardian	on	a	later	turn,	or	moving	away	from	that	site	before	the	end	of	the	round	to	avoid	this.	NB:	The	discovered	site	is	now	a	new	place	Archaeologists	can	be	sent	to	dig.	When	being	sent	to	dig,	a	player	does	not	have	to	play	the	traversal	cost	in	Compasses,	because	the	site	has	already	been	found.		NB2:	An	archaeologist	can	be	sent	to	a	site	that	has	an	awakened	guardian,	but	similarly	to	above,	they	must	either	overcome	the	guardian	or	move	away	before	the	end	of	the	turn,	else	take	1	Fear	at	the	end	of	the	round.			3:	Overcome	a	Guardian:	One	of	your	archaeologists	must	be	present	at	a	site	with	an	awakened	Guardian.		1. Pay	the	cost	at	the	bottom	of	the	Guardian	Tile	2. Remove	the	Guardian	from	the	board,	and	place	it	face-up	next	to	your	player	board.		a. Some	Guardians	have	a	Boon	(top	right).	A	Boon	is	a	once-per-game	effect	that	may	be	resolved	on	any	of	your	turns.		i. Some	Boons	are	travel	icons	that	can	be	added	to	the	cost	of	travel,	as	required.		ii. Others	are	free	actions	that	can	be	used	at	any	time	on	your	turn.		iii. Flip	the	Guardian	face-down	when	you	have	used	its	Boon.	b. Most	Guardians	also	have	Points	(bottom	right)	which	are	scored	at	the	end	of	the	game	whether	you	use	the	boon	or	not.			4:	Buy	1	Card:	Examine	the	Card	Row	and	select	1	Card	to	buy	(Artifacts	are	left	of	the	Moon	Staff,	Items	are	right	of	the	Moon	Staff):	1. Select	1	Card	2. Pay	its	Coin	Cost	(items),	or	Compass	Cost	(Artefact).		a. If	it	is	an	item,	place	it	on	the	bottom	of	your	deck.	b. If	it	is	an	artefact,	move	it	to	your	play	area.	You	may	immediately	resolve	its	effect	(ignoring	the	normal	Tablet	Cost).	This	is	considered	part	of	your	Buy	1	Card	Action.	3. In	either	case,	refill	the	card	row,	by	sliding	the	relevant	section	of	the	card	row	towards	the	Moon	Staff	closing	any	gaps,	and	then	reveal	and	place	a	new	card	of	the	type	that	was	bought	into	the	remaining	empty	space	in	the	card	row.			5:	Play	1	Card	(that	is	not	a	Free	Action	Card):	1. Play	1	Card	from	your	Hand	face-up	into	your	Play	Area.	2. Resolve	the	Card’s	Effect		Any	Card	Effect	with	lightning	next	to	it	can	be	used	as	a	Free	Action,	and	does	not	need	a	Main	Action	to	use		• e.g.	playing	the	basic	cards	‘Funding’	and	‘Exploration’,	does	not	require	a	Main	Action.	Any	Card	Effect	without	a	lightning	icon	requires	a	Main	Action	to	use.		• e.g.	all	Artifact	Cards	need	a	Main	Action	to	use.		Artifact	Cards	require	a	Tablet	Token	to	be	spent	in	addition	to	playing	the	card	to	gain	its	Effect	each	time	it	is	played.		• Artefacts	may	also	have	other	costs	to	be	paid	each	time	they	are	activated.		Remember	–	A	card	can	be	played	for	its	Travel	value	or	its	Effect,	but	not	both.			Exiling	Cards:	If	a	game	effect	(see	icon)	causes	a	card	to	be	Exiled,	it	is	placed	in	a	pile	above	the	Game	Board	(unless	it	is	a	Fear	card,	in	which	case	return	it	to	the	Fear	Deck).	Exiled	cards	are	removed	from	the	game	and	do	not	come	back	into	play	(unless	they	are	a	Fear	Card).		6:	Advance	Research:	Advance	one	of	your	Research	Tokens	to	the	next	row	of	the	Research	Track.	1. Select	one	of	your	Research	Tokens	(notebook	or	magnifier)	to	move.		a. Restriction:	Your	Notebook	can	never	enter	a	higher	row	than	your	Magnifier.		2. Select	a	space	to	advance	the	token	into	a. You	can	only	move	a	Token	up	the	research	track,	never	down	b. The	space	you	select	must	be	adjacent	to	the	space	the	token	is	currently	on.	Sometimes	there	will	only	be	one	choice.		c. Pay	the	Cost	between	the	current	space	and	new	space.	d. Gain	the	effect	of	the	new	space	AND	the	row	effect	AND	the	effect	of	any	Bonus	Tile	(if	present).	i. If	a	Bonus	Tile	is	present	on	the	research	space,	gain	its	Bonus,	then	remove	the	tile	from	the	game.	ii. Gain	the	Row’s	Effect:	The	row	effect	will	be	different	depending	on	whether	you	moved	your	Magnifier	 or	 Notebook	 (effects	 are	 surrounded	 by	 magnifier	 or	 notebook	 shaped	 border).	The	points	are	scored	at	Game	End.	iii. The	Lost	Temple:	When	 your	 Magnifier	 reaches	 the	 top	 row	 of	 the	 Research	 Track,	 you	 have	discovered	the	Lost	Temple!		1. Place	your	Magnifier	on	the	highest	valued	vacant	space.		2. Then,	take	Bonus	Tile	stack,	search	through	it	for	the	tile	you	want,	and	gain	its	bonus.	3. Your	Notebook	can	never	enter	the	Lost	Temple	row.	4. Exploring	the	Lost	Temple:	Once	your	Magnifier	has	reached	the	Lost	Temple,	if	you	take	the	research	action,	you	instead	pay	to	take	1	Temple	Tile	from	any	of	the	stacks.		a. Bronze:	The	 cost	 of	 a	 Bronze	 Temple	 Tile	 is	 shown	 under	 each	 of	 the	 three	different	Bronze	stacks,	respectively.	
b. Silver:	Pay	the	sum	of	the	left	and	middle	costs	below	the	pyramid	(for	the	LH	Silver	Temple	Tile),	or	right	and	middle	costs	(for	the	RH	Silver	Temple	Tile).		c. Gold:	Pay	the	sum	of	all	three	costs	below	the	pyramid	for	a	Gold	Temple	Tile.		d. Tiles	are	limited.	You	cannot	buy	a	Temple	Tile	from	an	empty	Temple	Tile	Stack.			Assistants:	During	the	game,	a	player	may	Recruit	an	Assistant	when	they	move	their	Notebook	to	the	Assistant	row	of	the	Temple	Track	(see	icon,	above).		Each	Assistant	has	two	levels	(Silver	and	Gold).	When	you	gain	an	Assistant,	it	arrives	on	its	Silver	side,	and	you	may	upgrade	it	when	you	advance	to	the	Upgrade	Assistant	row	of	the	Temple	Track	(icon,	above).	The	Upgraded	Assistant	has	a	stronger	power.		• When	you	activate	the	Recruit	Assistant	Temple	Row:		o Choose	one	of	the	three	Assistants	available	on	the	Temple	Board.		o Move	the	Assistant	to	an	Assistant	Square	on	your	Player	Board,	keeping	them	Silver	side	up.		• Using	Assistants:		o Assistants	have	various	effects:	lightning	effects	are	Free	Actions,	else	their	Effect	requires	a	Main	Action.		§ You	may	need	to	choose	from	a	choice	of	two	effects.	§ Assistants	may	provide	discounts,	or	perform	conversions	of	resources.	o The	Effect	of	an	Assistant	may	be	used	immediately	(if	a	Free	Action),	or	saved	until	later.	o When	you	use	an	Assistant,	twist	it	sideways	to	show	it	has	been	used.	o Assistant	Effects	are	generally	once-per-round,	and	Assistants	are	twisted	upright	at	the	end	of	the	round	to	refresh	them.	§ Certain	Card	Effects	are	also	able	to	refresh	assistants	mid-round.	• When	you	activate	the	Upgrade	Assistant	Temple	Row:	o Flip	one	of	your	Assistants	to	its	Gold	side.	o This	Assistant	is	immediately	refreshed,	even	if	it	has	already	been	used	this	round.		7:	Passing:	On	your	turn,	you	can	choose	to	pass.	Passing	counts	as	your	main	action	for	the	turn.	When	you	pass,	you	may	use	up	any	free	actions	you	still	have	available.	Once	you	have	passed,	you	get	no	more	turns	for	the	rest	of	the	round.	The	round	ends	when	all	players	have	passed.		Setting	up	for	the	next	Round:		If	it	is	the	end	of	Rounds	I-IV,	end	the	round	by	setting	up	for	the	next	one	as	follows:	1. Return	both	of	your	archaeologists	to	your	player	board.		a. Each	time	you	take	back	an	archaeologist	from	a	site	with	a	guardian,	add	1	Fear	card	to	your	play	area.	2. If	you	have	cards	left	in	hand,	each	card	can	be	either:		a. Discarded	to	your	play	area,	or,		b. Saved	for	the	next	round.	3. Gather	all	cards	in	your	play	area,	shuffle	them	thoroughly,	and	put	them	face	down	on	the	bottom	of	your	deck.	a. Since	the	Card	you	may	have	purchased	this	round	went	on	the	bottom	of	your	deck	immediately	after	purchase,	the	cards	you	just	shuffled	from	your	play	area	will	go	below	it	in	your	draw	deck.	4. Refresh	your	assistants	(twist	them	vertical)	5. The	card	row	should	be	adjusted	as	follows:	a. Exile	the	two	cards	on	either	side	of	the	Moon	Staff	(1	artifact	and	1	item).		b. Move	the	Moon	Staff	one	position	to	the	right	(to	indicate	the	number	of	the	next	round).	c. Refill	the	card	row	(as	per	Action	4,	Step	3).	6. The	starting	player	marker	moves	one	place	to	the	left.	Start	the	new	round	(returning	to	Step	1	of	Course	of	Play).		If	it	is	the	end	of	Round	V,	Do	Step	1	only,	then	the	Game	Ends:	proceed	to	Final	Scoring.			Final	Scoring:	Record	all	players’	points	on	the	scoring	sheet	and	total	them	for	each	player.	Points	can	come	from	the	following	sources:	• Each	of	your	research	tokens	(Magnifier	and	Notebook)	scores	points	based	on	its	row.		o Magnifying	glasses	in	the	Lost	Temple	row	will	score	points	based	on	the	Points	space	they	were	placed	on.	• Each	of	your	Temple	Tiles	scores	the	amount	shown	on	the	tile.		• Each	of	your	Idols	scores	3	points,	even	if	it	is	in	a	slot.	Also	add	in	the	points	shown	in	empty	idol	slots.	• Each	Guardian	you	overcame	is	worth	5	points,	whether	you	used	the	boon	or	not.	• Each	item	and	artifact	card	scores	the	amount	of	points	shown	in	the	lower	right	corner.	• Fear	cards	score	-1	point	each.		o If	you	have	Fear	Tiles	(because	the	Fear	Deck	ran	out),	they	score	-2	points	each.	The	Player	with	the	most	points	wins.	In	case	of	a	tie,	the	tied	player	who	reached	the	Lost	Temple	first	wins.	If	no	one	reached	the	Lost	Temple,	the	tied	player	with	the	highest	Research	Token	Score	wins.			The	Snake	Temple	side:	Has	different	Travel	Costs,	and	a	Research	Track	with	Assistants	who	can	be	rescued	by	paying	an	Idol	to	enter	the	space.	The	Assistant	you	rescue	enters	play	Exhausted.	There	is	also	now	a	Magnifier	temple	row	that	allows	you	to	Upgrade	an	Assistant.	There	is	also	now	a	Research	Track	row	where	you	can	Gain	1	Fear	Card	to	gain	1	Bonus	Tile.		Appendix:	The	Game’s	Rulebook	has	Appendices	from	p22-24	to	cover	any	Card-related	questions.		
