Arnak Solo Mini-Expansions
Rival Objectives
This mini-expansion provides the rival expedition with additional 
motivations. Each time they accomplish an objective, they will score 
additional points. You can thwart their plans by accomplishing 
their objectives first.
New Components
This mini-expansion  
uses 5 new cards called 
rival  objectives . 
Setup
Use the two-player setup, as you usually do for an Arnak solo game. 
Six of the 2-point temple tiles will be left over after the temple is set 
up. Keep these tiles handy – they represent rewards your rivals can 
win by accomplishing objectives. You may need some of the leftover 
6-point tiles as well.
Keep the 5 objective cards in a face-down stack within easy reach.
Gameplay – One Round
Your rival is the starting player each round, as usual in the solo 
game.
Before your first turn o f  t h e  r o u n d ,  s h u ffl e  t h e  o b j e c t i v e s  f a c e  
down. Draw 3 at random and place them on the table face up. These 
are the actions your rival wants to take before you do.
Because the rival expedition has already taken one action this 
round, it is possible they have already accomplished one of these 
objectives. They don’t get points for that. Replace that objective 
with one of the two remaining in the deck, drawn at random.
If you are the first player to accomplish a particular objective, 
return it to the deck – your rival will not get points for it this round.
If your rival is the first player to accomplish a particular 
objective, set the objective aside and give your rival a 2-point tile – 
these points will be added into their final score.
Thus, in each round, your rival can earn 0, 2, 4, or 6 points from 
objectives. You do not earn points, but you can reduce the amount 
of points your rival gains. Tile Shortage:  If you aggressively pursue the objectives, the rival 
expedition will accomplish objectives only when they get lucky, 
and you will have enough 2-point tiles to last the entire game. 
However, if you are pursuing a less antagonistic strategy, you may 
occasionally need to give your rival a 6-point tile so you can return 
three 2-point tiles to the supply.
Tweaks
We feel that 3 objectives per round gives the game good variety and 
increases the challenge of the usual solo game. It is possible to get 
a taste of this expansion by dealing only 2 objectives each round. 
You can also increase the challenge by using 4 objectives, but the 
variety is best with 2 or 3.
Another way to tweak the expansion is to make the first card turned 
up worth 4 points. Put two 2-point temple tiles on it to denote that 
it is a higher-priority objective.
Key
Be the first player 
to buy an item this 
round.
Be the first player 
to discover a new 
site this round.
Be the first player to have a lot of archaeologists on the 
main board. Your rival needs 3; you need 2.
Tip: To help you remember this objective, put 3 rival 
archaeologists on the card – or 2, if your rival has 
already sent one to the main board. 
Be the first player 
to buy an artifact 
this round.
Be the first player 
to advance their 
magnifying glass 
token this round.
This booklet contains two print-and-play mini-expansions for the Lost Ruins of Arnak solo game. The Rival Objectives expansion adds 
more urgency to your solo game (and also makes it a little bit tougher). The Purple Actions expansion gives you a more formidable rival 
to compete with. These expansions can be used separately or in combination.
Components are designed to be printed as cards that are added to the Lost Ruins of Arnak solo game. You can print them on cardstock, 
or you can print them on paper and insert them into card sleeves (41 × 63 mm, Mini American).
Notes
You can accomplish an objective (and thus prevent your rival from 
scoring it) even if the action is not your main action. For example, 
an effect that lets you gain an item for free counts as “buying” the 
item, which would accomplish the Buy an Item objective. 
It is possible to accomplish multiple objectives on one turn. Because 
the Discover a New site objective overlaps with the Archaeologists 
objective, even your rival could accomplish two on one turn.Our joy at discovering the petroglyphs was greatly diminished when we also discovered the 
other expedition’s footprints. Too many times have we been second. Well, no more! If they 
plan to leave their camp at sunrise, then we must leave ours before first light.
1Arnak Solo Mini-Expansions
I tell my comrades to stay on task, to ignore the other expedition and focus instead on 
what we can do. How I wish I could take my own advice! It seems that no matter how much 
we accomplish each day, the other expedition is always able to do a little more.
Purple Actions
Congratulations on winning the Lost Ruins of Arnak solo variant. 
Multiple times. At the highest difficulty level.
Many fans of Arnak have written to us telling us how they have 
already beaten our toughest solo game and are looking for a bigger 
challenge. Here it is:
Components
The action tiles that came with your game are replaced by these 
print-and-play action cards. 
Setup
Instead of a stack of action tiles, you will make a deck of action 
cards. Use the 5 archaeologist action cards, as usual:
And add 5 purple or red action cards, one of each type:
 
Your difficulty level increases by 1 for each red card and 2 for each 
purple card, giving you a range from 5 to 10.
We have also included print-and-play versions of the green tiles, in 
case you want to use them, too.
The other difference in setup is that 
the rival expedition will now have 
a notebook token to go with their 
magnifying glass.
Actions
Purple actions are mostly the same as red and green actions ... 
but nastier.
Research
In round V, the rival expedition advances their 
magnifying glass twice. Thus, it is possible for 
them to get 2 temple tiles in one turn.
Overcome a Guardian
After overcoming a guardian (or researching with the magnifying 
glass when no guardian is available) the rival expedition will 
research with their notebook – unless that would move their 
notebook above their magnifying glass.
Their notebook can remove research bonus tiles, and it will score 
notebook points at the end of the game.
Note:  If you are using the Rival Objectives mini-expansion, the 
notebook has no effect on the magnifying glass objective.
Buy a Card
Your rival buys two cards with one action, one of each type. One 
card is the one with the highest point value in the indicated type. 
The other is the card with lowest point value.
Discover a New Site
 The action f ollows the same rules as bef ore . 
However, at the end of the game, each of the 
rival expedition’s idols is worth one extra 
point. (That’s 4 points for each unique, face-up 
idol, and 3 points for those in the -1 stack.)
Note:  This rule applies only if this purple card is among those 
chosen for the game.
2