Lost Ruins of Arnak  rules summary  
 
Object:  Each player leads an expedition on the uncharted island of Arnak.  Points are scored for a 
variety of activities.  After five rounds the player with the most points wins.  
 
Setup:   
1. Place the main board with the Bird Temple side face up .  The darker Snake Temple side follows 
special rules (see the end of  this summary).  
2. Shuffle the Artifact deck and place it on its spot in the upper left.  
3. Place the Fear deck face up on its spot in the top middle.  
4. Shuffle the Item  deck and place it on its spot in the upper right.  
5. Place the moon staff token on the card row, under the “I” symbol.  
6. Deal one artifact to the left of the moon staff and five items to t he right.  
7. Mix the 16 idol tokens face down.  Place one face up on each site with a single figure.  Place one 
face up and one face down on each site with two figure s. 
8. If playing with four players, return the five oval blocking tokens (with a picture of a wa ve on one 
side) to the game box.  
If playing with three players, mix the tokens face down, turn over three, place the three on the 
double -boot icon beneath their respective action spaces (wave side up), and return the other two to 
the game box.  
If playing w ith two players, block all of the double -boot action spaces  with the tokens . 
9. On the top of the temple, place the temple tiles into six stacks (one for 11 -points, two for 6 -points, 
and three for 2 -points) with as many  tiles in each stack as there are players.  If playing w ith less 
than four players, return the rest to the game box.  
10. Mix the 18 research bonus tiles face down.  Place a number equal to the number of players face 
down in the spot just below the temple along the board edge.  Place one tile face up on each space 
of the research track except for those marked for only “3+” or “4” players if playing with less than 
four players.  Return the remaining tiles to the game box.  
11. Place the supply board just below the main board.  
12. Place the tablet, arrowhead, jewel, coin, and compass resources in their respective spots.  
13. Shuffle the site tiles with a single figure  and place the stack  on its spot . 
14. Shuffle the guardian tiles and place the stack  on its spot . 
15. Shuffle the site tiles with two  figure s and place the stack  on its spot . 
16. Shuffle the assistant tiles silver side up into three random stacks of four tiles each and place them 
on their spots.  
17. Each player chooses a color and takes the player board, research tokens, archeologist figures, and 
four basic cards of that color plus two Fear cards from the main board.  
18. Place your research tokens on the starting  space of the research track with your magnifying glass 
on top of the notebook.  
19. Shuffle your 6 -card deck and place it on its spot on your player board.  
20. Place your two archeologists in the middle of  your player board.  
21. Randomly determine the starting player and give them the starting player marker (alarm clock).  
22. Give two coins to player 1, a coin and a compass to player 2, two coins and a compass to player 3, 
and a coin and two compasses  to player 4.  
 
 
 
 Game Play : The game is played over five rounds.  Each round has the following four steps:  
1. Draw – each player draws cards from their deck until they have a hand of five cards.  
2. Take Turns – starting with the player with the starting player marker  and proceeding clockwise, 
each player takes one main action and an unlimited number of free actions.  
3. Pass – on your turn, you may pass.  The remaining players continue taking turns until all 
players have passed.  
4. Set up the next round – see the last page of this summary . 
You may play a card for either its travel value (in the upper left) or its effect – not both.  
A Fear card has no effect, only a travel value.  
When you use a card, place it face up in your play area (anywhere next to your player board) .  These 
cards remain in your play area until step 4 above  (i.e., your deck is not reshuffled if it runs out) . 
Free actions are noted with a lightning bolt icon.  They can be played before, after, and even during 
your main action.  
The x3 multiplier tokens are used if you run out of resource tokens.  Placing a resource on a multiplier 
token indicates that you have three of that resource.  
If you need to take a Fear card and the Fear deck is empty, take a -2 Fear token instead (the flip side of 
the multiplier token).  If you are able to exile a card from your play area, you may exile a Fear token 
instead.  
 
Main Action  – Dig at a Site :  
1. Move an archeologist from your player board to one of the five sites marked with a tent symbol  
or to a site with one or two figures after it has  been discovered.  
2. Pay the travel cost depicted on an  unoccupied space at the site.  
3. Resolve the site’s effect.  
A plane can pay for any one travel icon.  A car or boat can pay for the matching icon or for a boot.  A 
boot can only pay for a boot icon.  
You can always pay two coins to generate a plane to pay for any one travel icon.  
If a card provides two icons, they can both be used to pay for the travel cost but if only one is used, the 
other cannot carry ov er to your next turn.  
 
Main Action  – Discover a New Site : Choose a site with one or two figure s that does not have a site 
tile. 
1. Pay three  or six compasses based on whether the site is one the eight below or four above the 
line separating them, respectively.  Note that this cost is only paid when discovering a new site, 
not when digging at a discovered site later.  
2. Move an archeologist from your player board to the site . 
3. Pay the travel cost depicted on the space at the site.  
4. Take the idol and resolve its effect.   If the site has a second, face down idol, take it but keep it 
face down.  Place the idol(s) face down on your player board below  the idol sp aces.  Each idol 
will be worth three points at game end.  
5. Take the top site tile matching the number of figures and  place it face up on the site, then 
resolve its effect.   The site is now discovered.  
6. Take the top guardian tile and place it face up on the site tile . 
Note that you will receive a Fear card at the end of the round if your archeologist and the guardian 
remain unless you have overcome the guardian on a subsequent turn or have moved your archeologist 
or the guardian with the help of certain cards.  
Using an Idol – as a free action on your turn, move an idol on your player board into the leftmost 
empty idol space on the top of your board.  Choose one of the five depicted effect s to the left of the 
idol slots .  Note that empty  idol slots are worth additional points at game end.   
Main Action  – Overcome a Guardian : The presence of a guardian does not prevent an  archeologist 
from digging at the site.  
To overcome a guardian, you must already have an archeologist at the site:  
1. Pay the cost at the bottom of the guardian tile . 
2. Place the guardian tile next to your player board.  
Once per game, as a free action, you may gain the boon depicted in the upper right corner of a guardian 
tile next to your player board.  The n turn the tile face down.  
 
Main Action  – Buy a  Card : Improve your deck by purchasing cards from the card row.  
To Buy an Artifact : 
1. Pay the compass cost in th e bottom left of the card.  
2. Move the card to your play area.  
3. You may resolve the card’s effect, ignoring the tablet cost to the left of the effect.  
4. Slide the cards in the card row toward the moon staff.  Then replace the empty card slot with 
the top card from the Artifact deck.  
To Buy an Item:  
1. Pay the coin cost in the bottom left of the card.  
2. Place the card face down on the bottom of your deck.  
3. Slide the cards in the card row toward the moon staff.  Then replace the empty card slot with 
the top card from t he Item deck.  
If a deck ever runs out of cards, that card type no longer refills the card row.  
 
Main Action  – Play a Card : Play a card from your hand face up into your play area and resolve its 
effect.  
The card remains in your play area for the rest of the  round unless you exile it.  
If the effect is a free action (lightning bolt icon), playing the card is not a main action.  
If the card is an artifact, you must first pay the tablet cost to the left of the effect . 
Exile – some effects send cards to special ex ile piles near their decks (Fear cards are exiled to the top 
of the Fear deck).  Your starting cards (Funding and Exploration) are exiled to the game box.  
 
Main Action  – Research :  
1. Decide which research token to move up a row to a connected space.  Multiple tokens can share 
the same space.  Your notebook may not be moved to a row above your magnifying glass (i.e., 
first you discover something, then you write it down).  
2. Pay the cost on  the bridge connecting the spaces.  
3. If the space has a research bonus tile, gain its depicted bonus and remove the tile from the game 
(first come, first served).  Also resolve the row’s effect to the right based on whether you 
moved your magnifying glass or  your notebook.  You can gain these bonuses in the order of 
your choosing.  
The Lost Temple – when your magnifying glass reaches the top row, place it on the left -most empty 
space .  Then look through the stack of face down bonus tiles, choose one, and return the rest face 
down back to their spot.  You cannot move your notebook to the Lost Temple row.  
Once your magnifying glass has reached the Lost Temple, you may take a Researc h action to take one 
of the temple tiles by paying its cost.  A 2 -point tile has its cost printed below it.  A 6 -point tile 
costs the two 2 -point costs below it.  A n 11-point tile’s cost is equal to all three 2 -point costs.  
 
Main Action – Pass : You get no more turns for the rest of the round.  
The round ends when all players have passed.   
Assistants : When you move your notebook to a row with a silver assistant icon, choose one of the face 
up assistant tiles and move it to an assistant square on your player b oard.  
Note that the stacks of assistant s are supposed to be kept hidden.  Only when the top tile is taken will 
players see what the next tile is.  The silver side of each assistant shows what its upgraded gold side 
will be (depicted at the bottom of the ti le). 
To use an assistant, turn it sideways to show it is exhausted.  At the end of the round, exhausted 
assistants are refreshed (turning them back up).  
Some assistants offer a choice of effects separated by a slash.  
An assistant without a free action ligh tning icon requires a main action to be used.  
When you move your notebook to a row with a gold assistant icon,  flip over one of your assistants to 
its gold side.  The tile is also refreshed even if its silver side had been used earlier in the round.  
 
Setti ng Up the Next Round :  
1. Return your archeologists to your player board.  If you return the archeologist from a site with a 
guardian, add one Fear card to your play area.  
2. If this is the end of round V, skip the remaining steps and proceed to final scoring.  
3. If you have any cards left in your hand, you may discard any to your play area . 
4. Shuffle the cards in your play area and place them face down on the bottom of your deck.  
5. Refresh your assistants.  
6. Exile the artifact and item cards adjacent to the moon staff.  
7. Move the moon staff one space to the right (showing the new round number).  
8. Slide the cards in the card row toward the moon staff.  Then r efill the card row from the Artifact 
deck.  
9. Pass the starting player marker to the left.  
10. Draw from your deck until you have a hand of five cards.  
 
Final Scoring : Record the players’ points on the scoring sheet:  
1. Each research token scores points based on its row.  
2. Each temple tile scores its printed points.  
3. Each of your idols scores three points.  
4. Each of the empty idol slots on your player board scores the depicted points.  
5. Each guardian is worth five points, regardless of whether its boon was used.  
6. Each  item and artifact card scores points depicted in the lower right corner.  
7. Each Fear card scores negative one  point.  
The player with the most points wins.  If tied, the tied player who reached the Lost Temple first wins.  
The second tiebreaker is the player with the highest research score.  Otherwise it is a shared win.  
 
The Snake Temple Board : During setup, rand omly deal one assistant per player to the large space in 
the middle of the research track.  This means that the rest of the Assistant stacks will not necessarily be 
equal.  
To cross to the space with these assistants, you must pay an idol tile from your pla yer board (but not 
one from an idol slot).  The tile is removed from the game.  
The magnifying glass effect for this space lets you secretly look through the stack of tiles in this space, 
keep one, and return the stack to the research track.  This assistant  is placed on your player board 
exhausted.  
The top row on the research track – you gain a Fear card when you move your magnifying glass to this 
row.  If there are multiple bonus tiles in this row, you choose one.  